---
layout: post
title:  "Un-Period Yourself"
date:   2023-11-15 12:22:52 +0530
category: musings
---
# Phase I: It will go all “in”?!

I have always been a curious individual who is ready to experiment and explore. Nevertheless the idea of menstrual cups was not very inviting to me. I first found out about the cup somewhere on the internet. On further digging and finally discovering that the entire cup is supposed to go "inside" my body completely, my amygdala silenced the curious and experimental parts of my head and the idea was temporarily laid to rest.

Soon enough during the second year of my college, I saw a poster advertising an awareness session about the menstrual cup. It was an initiative of a student from Oklahoma, Mr Pranav Mohan (yes someone who doesn't menstruate himself) and a PhD student of our college, IIT Kanpur, Ms Rupal Srivastav, who happened to be a good friend of mine. Mr Pranav Mohan had taken up this Project for Peace to spread awareness about the cup in the villages neighbouring Kanpur. Together with Mrs Anita, who was an educator, they had already conducted a number of sessions in the villages and also provided them with the cup for a price as low as fifty rupees. Here is the link the TED Talk wherein Pranav talks about the project.

The session was well structured and explained all the details of how to use the cup. The information of how to use cups can be found in numerous YouTube videos as well as of my posts here. In the session I also met several students who were using the cup and who couldn’t stop telling me the wonders of the cup. It is eco-friendly, rash-free, no hassle of disposing and so on it went. The session proved to be very useful to me. It did subside my fear of the unknown and made me comfortable with the idea of insertion and the cup. Moreover it also acquainted me to a peer group who were cup users. A few months after the session I bought the cup myself.

# Phase II: Where is my hole?

I may have bought a cup and also attended a detailed session, but that was just the beginning. Being the young virgin Indian girl, I was quite unsure of "where" to insert the cup. I sat down in the washroom with my legs spread looking for some visible hole, my "vagina". I have to admit I didn't find anything. Quite worried, I had declared to all my girlfriends that I don't have a vagina at all. It took me 2-3 sittings to finally realize there is some space between all the flesh, right between the inner lips and much below the clitoris. Scared that it might hurt, I fearfully inserted a finger inside. Slowly I was able to put my entire finger inside! 

When you insert your finger in, it doesn't go in straight (horizontal, parallel to the floor) but rather it's bent in an upward curve (towards your belly). Inside the vaginal canal, you can feel a lot of flesh around your finger. You can move your finger both sides and also towards the bottom. The top, I feel, is rather fixed. You can feel something solid on the top that can't be moved. This is your pelvic bone. Just below that you can feel a tube like muscle. This is your urethra (you pee from here).  Also you should be able to feel a nose like tip of the cervix especially if you are on your periods. Generally the cervix drops down and moves towards your pelvic bone during periods. Identifying your cervix is an easy task. Anything that you can feel other than the endless muscles of the vaginal walls is the cervix. If you are on your period your finger will come out all red. You can notice that you really can't feel the finger inside your vaginal canal. You can feel the inside with your finger but not the other way around. This is why you don't feel the cup when it's inside.

I wasn't able to comprehend so much at first. But eventually I completed my Biology Practical lesson. Though I was able to insert a finger, the cup was still quite huge even in its smallest punch down fold. I tried inserting a tampon (not bigger than a finger) but couldn't. Period after period, I relentlessly tried to insert the cup for a year more, but I failed. No matter how much I had heard, read or talked about the cup, the idea that an object with a diameter of 3 cm going inside me and staying there was still frightening.

# ​Phase III: Village Women using Cups ?!
​
I had kept in touch with Mr Pranav Mohan. Along with Ms Rupal, we had also organized another such awareness session for the female workers of our college. During the summer of my third year, I had the chance to visit one of the villages where the sessions had been held previously and cups were now in popular use. I was amazed at how easily and quickly the village women had adapted to the cup, while us, the “City-elite” , were so scared of what is natural: insertion. When I would talk to them about my inability to insert the cup, they would wonder why I haven't been able to use it yet. They would casually say to me, “It's so simple that you simply have to put it in”.

The cup is a one stop solution to all the menstrual problems of the villagers.  They will not choose to spend monthly again and again on buying sanitary napkins. No matter how cheap they are, sanitary napkins are still a recurring cost. Any poor household will choose to avoid this cost when they can by using an old torn piece of cloth. Moreover, there are no garbage collection systems in rural India. Used pads majorly end up in rivers or huge stinking ponds. This is even more harmful for the sanitation of the area and can lead to widespread diseases.

Cups on the other hand are a one time investment. Something that the government, a benevolent corporation or an NGO can provide too. They don't create any solid waste. You can use them without wearing underwear as well. They are excellent for working in the fields, walking large distances and doing hard physical activities. They do not cause any rashes or sweating unlike pads.

Apart from economical and physical comfort, usage of cups also led to reforms in social practices. India is full of taboos and orthodox practices related to the monthly flow of red blood. One such practice is that a menstruating woman cannot enter the kitchen to cook and cannot serve the elderly. One of the villagers, Mrs Amresh Patel, had started using the cup. During one of her periods when she was using the cup, she actually forgot that she was menstruating and carried out the entire work of cooking and serving food as usual. In some time she recalled that she was menstruating and was not supposed to enter the kitchen. It was then that she observed the ridiculousness of the practice she had been following for years. She reasoned out that our body always has blood inside at any time of the month. Using the cup, the menstrual blood is also held inside the body. Just like all the bodily blood there is nothing about it to feel disgusted. We always have blood inside our bodies and menstruation does not change anything then why should we act differently when we are menstruating.

This unexpected social reform that the usage of cups had brought to the villages was remarkable and unexpected. I had tried and failed to use the cup for more than a year by now. However, seeing how positively using cups had impacted the lives of the women kept me trying. I was determined that I will surely use a cup somewhere down the line.

# Phase IV: Finishing Line!​
​
I kept consulting friends and pondering on what I was doing wrong. In one such conversation Ms Rupal told me about Vaginal weightlifting. Yes, the vagina is capable of lifting weight. This truly amazed me. Vagina is just a muscle of the body and just like any other muscle it is very well capable of expanding and contracting to lift weight. You can contract it and loosen it even right now wherever you are. It's a sensation in the pelvic muscle which feels quite similar to the sensation of pooping.

Rupal told me that perhaps I am just too nervous while inserting it. This leads my vaginal muscles to contract, making it difficult and nearly impossible for me to insert the cup. I could relate with what she had diagnosed. I was unaware that the vagina is a voluntary muscle and I will need to relax my pelvic muscles before insertion. I did recall my pelvic muscles would always be contracted when I was trying to insert the cup.

This revelation helped me immensely. In the next period I was easily able to insert a tampon. My jubilation on this achievement knew no limits. After all, I had come from thinking that I have no vagina to successfully being able to insert a tampon.

I still found the cup to be huge in comparison to a finger width tampon and was unable to shove it in. But I knew the trick. I had to release my pelvic muscle and then put it in. I was finally able to insert a cup after trying for 1.5 years. The cup goes above the rigid bone that you can feel in the vagina with your finger. It's stem hangs below the bone and just above the opening of the vaginal canal. You can't see the cup externally anywhere, but you can feel it's stem when you insert your finger.​

I have now used the cup for the last four cycles and it's indeed the most hassle free menstrual product. You can almost feel as if you aren't on periods at all. It is my “un-perioding” device. There is no sweating, no leaks, no rashes, no smell. Several times I forget that I am menstruating at all. This was the unique journey of my cup and me.

I have always been a curious individual who is ready to experiment and explore. Nevertheless the idea of menstrual cups was not very inviting to me. I first found out about the cup somewhere on the internet. On further digging and finally discovering that the entire cup is supposed to go "inside" my body completely, my amygdala silenced the curious and experimental parts of my head and the idea was temporarily laid to rest.

Soon enough during the second year of my college, I saw a poster advertising an awareness session about the menstrual cup. It was an initiative of a student from Oklahoma, Mr Pranav Mohan (yes someone who doesn't menstruate himself) and a PhD student of our college, IIT Kanpur, Ms Rupal Srivastav, who happened to be a good friend of mine. Mr Pranav Mohan had taken up this Project for Peace to spread awareness about the cup in the villages neighbouring Kanpur. Together with Mrs Anita, who was an educator, they had already conducted a number of sessions in the villages and also provided them with the cup for a price as low as fifty rupees. Here is the link the TED Talk wherein Pranav talks about the project.

The session was well structured and explained all the details of how to use the cup. The information of how to use cups can be found in numerous YouTube videos as well as of my posts here. In the session I also met several students who were using the cup and who couldn’t stop telling me the wonders of the cup. It is eco-friendly, rash-free, no hassle of disposing and so on it went. The session proved to be very useful to me. It did subside my fear of the unknown and made me comfortable with the idea of insertion and the cup. Moreover it also acquainted me to a peer group who were cup users. A few months after the session I bought the cup myself.